VirtualMachinePool Documentation (#646)
kubevirt/user-guide: docs/virtual_machines/pool.md

# VirtualMachinePool

A *VirtualMachinePool* tries to ensure that a specified

> number of VirtualMachine replicas and its respectives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number of VirtualMachine replicas and their respective
```

> VirtualMachineInstances are in ready state at any time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VirtualMachineInstances are in the ready state at any time.
```

In other words, a *VirtualMachinePool* makes sure that a
VirtualMachine or a set of VirtualMachines is always up
and ready. 

> No state is kept and no guarantees about the maximum number
> of VirtualMachineInstance replicas which are up are given.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No state is kept and no guarantees are made about the maximum number
of VirtualMachineInstance replicas running at any time.
```

For example, the *VirtualMachinePool* may decide to create
new replicas if possibly still running VMs are entering an
unknown state.

## Using VirtualMachinePool

The *VirtualMachinePool* allows us to specify a *VirtualMachineTemplate*
in `spec.virtualMachineTemplate`. It consists of `ObjectMetadata` in
`spec.virtualMachineTemplate.metadata`, and a `VirtualMachineSpec` in
`spec.virtualMachineTemplate.spec`. The specification of the virtual machine
is equal to the specification of the virtual machine in the
`VirtualMachine` workload.

`spec.replicas` can be used to specify how many replicas are wanted. If
unspecified, the default value is 1. This value can be updated anytime.
The controller will react to the changes.

`spec.selector` is used by the controller to keep track of managed
virtual machines. The selector specified there must be able to match the
virtual machine labels as specified in `spec.virtualMachineTemplate.metadata.labels`.
If the selector does not match these labels, or they are empty, the

> controller will simply do nothing except from logging an error. The user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
controller will simply do nothing except log an error. The user
```

> is responsible for not creating other virtual machines or
> *VirtualMachinePools* which conflict with the selector and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is responsible for avoiding the creation of other virtual machines or
*VirtualMachinePools* which may conflict with the selector and
```

the template labels.

### Creating a VirtualMachinePool

> VirtualMachinePool is part of Kubevirt API `pool.kubevirt.io/v1alpha1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VirtualMachinePool is part of the Kubevirt API `pool.kubevirt.io/v1alpha1`.
```

This can be achieved either by using `kubectl edit` or `kubectl patch`.
Using `kubectl patch` it would look like:

    kubectl patch vm vm-pool-cirros-0 --type merge --patch '{"metadata":{"ownerReferences":null}}' 

> **Note:** You may want to update your VirtualMachine labels as well to avoid impact on selectors.

### Using the Horizontal Pod Autoscaler

> **Note:** This requires KubeVirt 0.59 or newer.

The
[HorizontalPodAutoscaler](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/)
(HPA) can be used with a `VirtualMachinePool`. Simply
reference it in the spec of the autoscaler:

    apiVersion: autoscaling/v1
    kind: HorizontalPodAutoscaler
    metadata:
      creationTimestamp: null
      name: vm-pool-cirros
    spec:
      maxReplicas: 10
      minReplicas: 3
      scaleTargetRef:
        apiVersion: pool.kubevirt.io/v1alpha1
        kind: VirtualMachinePool
        name: vm-pool-cirros
      targetCPUUtilizationPercentage: 50

or use `kubectl autoscale` to define the HPA via the commandline:

    $ kubectl autoscale vmpool vm-pool-cirros --min=3 --max=10 --cpu-percent=50

## Exposing a VirtualMachinePool as a Service

> A VirtualMachinePool could be exposed as a service. When

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A VirtualMachinePool may be exposed as a service. When
```

Adjusting tense.

this is done, one of the VirtualMachine replicas will be picked
for the actual delivery of the service.

For example, exposing SSH port (22) as a ClusterIP service:

    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Service
    metadata:
      name: vm-pool-cirros-ssh
    spec:
      type: ClusterIP
      selector:
        kubevirt.io/vmpool: vm-pool-cirros
      ports:
        - protocol: TCP
          port: 2222
          targetPort: 22

Saving this manifest into `vm-pool-cirros-ssh.yaml` and submitting it to
Kubernetes will create the `ClusterIP` service listening on port 2222 and
forwarding to port 22.

See [Service
Objects](http://kubevirt.io/user-guide/virtual_machines/service_objects/)
for more details.

## Using Persistent Storage

> **Note:** DataVolumes are part of [CDI](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/operations/containerized_data_importer/)

> Usage of a `DataVolumeTemplates` within a `spec.virtualMachineTemplate.spec` will result in unique
> persistent storage getting created for each VM within a VMPool. The `DataVolumeTemplate`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usage of a `DataVolumeTemplates` within a `spec.virtualMachineTemplate.spec` will result in the creation
of unique persistent storage for each VM within a VMPool. The `DataVolumeTemplate`
```

> name will have the VM's sequential postfix appended to when the VM is created from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
name will have the VM's sequential postfix appended to it when the VM is created from the
```

> `spec.virtualMachineTemplate.spec.dataVolumeTemplates` which makes each VM a completely unique stateful workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`spec.virtualMachineTemplate.spec.dataVolumeTemplates`. This makes each VM a completely unique stateful workload.
```
